Add tutorial "Training and Fine-Tuning Sentence Transformers Models" (#416)
huggingface/blog: train-and-fine-tune-sentence-transformers-models.md

---

<h1>
    Training and Fine-Tuning Sentence Transformers Models
</h1>

<div class="blog-metadata">
    <small>Published July 18, 2022.</small>
    <a target="_blank" class="btn no-underline text-sm mb-5 font-sans" href="https://github.com/huggingface/blog/blob/main/train-and-fine-tune-sentence-transformers-models.md">
        Update on GitHub
    </a>
</div>

<div class="author-card">
    <a href="/espejelomar"> 
        <img class="avatar avatar-user" src="https://bafybeidj6oxo7zm5pejnc2iezy24npw4qbt2jgpo4n6igt7oykc7rbvcxi.ipfs.dweb.link/omar_picture.png" title="Gravatar">
        <div class="bfc">
            <code>espejelomar</code>
            <span class="fullname">Omar Espejel</span>
        </div>
    </a>
</div>

Check out this tutorial with the Notebook Companion:
<a target="_blank" href="TODO">
    <img src="https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg" alt="Open In Colab"/>
</a>

Training or fine-tuning a Sentence Transformers model highly depends on the available data and the target task. The key is understanding how to feed data into the model and preparing your dataset accordingly.

In this tutorial, we will:

> 1. Understand how Sentence Transformers models work. Create one from "scratch" or fine-tune one from the Hugging Face Hub.

Author: Thanks! I will apply your suggestion.

pooling_model = models.Pooling(word_embedding_model.get_word_embedding_dimension())

## Join steps 1 and 2 using the modules argument
model = SentenceTransformer(modules=[word_embedding_model, pooling_model])
```

From the code above, we can see that Sentence Transformers models are made up of modules, that is, a list of layers that are executed consecutively. The input text enters the first layer, and the final output comes from the last layer. As simple as it looks, the above model is a typical architecture for Sentence Transformers models. If necessary, additional layers can be added, for example, dense, bag of words, and convolutional.

Why not use a Transformer model, like BERT or Roberta, out of the box to create embeddings for entire sentences and texts? There are at least two reasons.

1. Pre-trained Transformers require heavy computation to perform semantic search tasks. For example, finding the most similar pair in a collection of 10,000 sentences [requires about 50 million inference computations (~65 hours) with BERT](https://arxiv.org/abs/1908.10084). In contrast, a BERT Sentence Transformers model reduces the time to about 5 seconds.

> 2. Once trained, Transformers create poor sentence representations out of the box.

Reviewer: It might be worth expanding a bit on why/how the sentence representations that Transformers make aren't very good

---
title: 'Training and Fine-Tuning Sentence Transformers Models'

> thumbnail: /blog/assets/87_training_st_models/thumbnail.png

Author: Agree, changed the thumbnail to use Chunte's template.

</a>

Training or fine-tuning a Sentence Transformers model highly depends on the available data and the target task. The key is twofold: (1) understand how to input data into the model and prepare your dataset accordingly, and (2) know the different loss functions and how they relate to the dataset.

In this tutorial, you will:

1. Understand how Sentence Transformers models work by creating one from "scratch" or fine-tuning one from the Hugging Face Hub.
2. Learn the different types of structures your dataset should have.
3. Review the different loss functions you can choose based on your data structure.
4. Train or fine-tune your model.
5. Learn when Sentence Transformers models may not be the best choice.

## How Sentence Transformers models work

In a Sentence Transformer model, we map a variable-length text (or image pixels) to a fixed-size embedding representing that input's meaning. To get started with embeddings, check out our [previous tutorial](https://huggingface.co/blog/getting-started-with-embeddings). In this post, we will focus on text.

This is how the Sentence Transformers models work:

> 1. **Layer 1** – The input text is passed through a pre-trained Transformer model that can be obtained directly from the [Hugging Face Hub](https://huggingface.co/models?pipeline_tag=fill-mask&sort=downloads). This tutorial will use the "[microsoft/deberta-v3-small](https://huggingface.co/microsoft/deberta-v3-small)" model. The Transformer outputs are contextualized word embeddings for all input tokens; imagine an embedding for each word of the text.

Reviewer 2: Technically the output is an embedding per token, not per word. If you think saying per word is clearer for reader it's an ok assumption I think

Author: I think readers of this post would have an intermediate level, so it would be better to write it as "token" instead of "word," as you suggest. Thanks!

> 1. **Layer 1** – The input text is passed through a pre-trained Transformer model that can be obtained directly from the [Hugging Face Hub](https://huggingface.co/models?pipeline_tag=fill-mask&sort=downloads). This tutorial will use the "[microsoft/deberta-v3-small](https://huggingface.co/microsoft/deberta-v3-small)" model. The Transformer outputs are contextualized word embeddings for all input tokens; imagine an embedding for each word of the text.

Author: Thank you! Good point. They have not yet merged it. Maybe I shall change the model.

> 2. **Layer 2**: Word embeddings go through a pooling process to get a single fixed-length embedding for all the text. For example, mean pooling averages the word embeddings generated by the model.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. **Layer 2**: The embeddings go through a pooling layer to get a single fixed-length embedding for all the text. For example, mean pooling averages the embeddings generated by the model.
```

This figure summarizes the process:

> ![](assets/87_training_st_models/training_process.png) 

Reviewer 2: Nice figure!

Remember to install the Sentence Transformers library with `pip install -U sentence-transformers`. In code, this two-step process is simple: 

```py
from sentence_transformers import SentenceTransformer, models

## Step 1: use an existing language model

> word_embedding_model = models.Transformer('bert-base-uncased', max_seq_length=256)

Reviewer 2: Note that above you mentioned you were using another model, so I would either modify the text above or change this

Author: My mistake! Thanks 🙏

> word_embedding_model = models.Transformer('bert-base-uncased', max_seq_length=256)

Reviewer 2: Is the `max_seq_length` needed?

## Step 2: use a pool function over the token embeddings
pooling_model = models.Pooling(word_embedding_model.get_word_embedding_dimension())

## Join steps 1 and 2 using the modules argument
model = SentenceTransformer(modules=[word_embedding_model, pooling_model])
```

> From the code above, we can see that Sentence Transformers models are made up of modules, that is, a list of layers that are executed consecutively. The input text enters the first layer, and the final output comes from the last layer. As simple as it looks, the above model is a typical architecture for Sentence Transformers models. If necessary, additional layers can be added, for example, dense, bag of words, and convolutional.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
From the code above, you can see that Sentence Transformers models are made up of modules, that is, a list of layers that are executed consecutively. The input text enters the first module, and the final output comes from the last component. As simple as it looks, the above model is a typical architecture for Sentence Transformers models. If necessary, additional layers can be added, for example, dense, bag of words, and convolutional.
```

Why not use a Transformer model, like BERT or Roberta, out of the box to create embeddings for entire sentences and texts? There are at least two reasons.

1. Pre-trained Transformers require heavy computation to perform semantic search tasks. For example, finding the most similar pair in a collection of 10,000 sentences [requires about 50 million inference computations (~65 hours) with BERT](https://arxiv.org/abs/1908.10084). In contrast, a BERT Sentence Transformers model reduces the time to about 5 seconds.
2. Once trained, Transformers create poor sentence representations out of the box. A BERT model with its token embeddings averaged to create a sentence embedding [performs worse than the GloVe embeddings](https://arxiv.org/abs/1908.10084) developed in 2014.

If you want to fine-tune an existing Sentence Transformers model, you can skip these steps and import the model from the Hugging Face Hub:

```py
from sentence_transformers import SentenceTransformer

model_id = "sentence-transformers/multi-qa-MiniLM-L6-cos-v1"
model = SentenceTransformer(model_id)

> ```

Reviewer 2: This text looks a bit strange here. What do they need to skip concretely?

Author: I agree. I added a more detailed text:

In this section we are creating a Sentence Transformers model from scratch. If you want to fine-tune an existing Sentence Transformers model, you can skip the steps above and import it from the Hugging Face Hub. You can find most of the Sentence Transformers models in the ["Sentence Similarity"](https://huggingface.co/models?pipeline_tag=sentence-similarity) task. Here we load the "sentence-transformers/all-MiniLM-L6-v2" model:

> Now for the most critical part: the data structure.

Reviewer 2: Let's use dataset format instead of data structure, as data structure sounds more like linked lists, graphs, and trees :) 
```suggestion
Now for the most critical part: the dataset format.
```

## How to prepare your dataset for training a Sentence Transformers model

> > "To represent our training data, we use the `InputExample` class to store training examples. As parameters, it accepts texts, a list of strings representing our pairs (or triplets). Further, we can also pass a label (float or int)." - [Sentence Transformers Documentation](https://www.sbert.net/docs/training/overview.html#training-data).

Reviewer 2: I think it's ok to remove this. Not sure if it adds much extra value. WDYT?

Author: Agree! Thanks :)

> To train a Sentence Transformers model, you need to inform it somehow that two sentences have a certain degree of similarity. Therefore, each example in our data requires a label or structure that allows the model to understand whether two sentences are similar or different.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To train a Sentence Transformers model, you need to inform it somehow that two sentences have a certain degree of similarity. Therefore, each example in the data requires a label or structure that allows the model to understand whether two sentences are similar or different.
```

> Unfortunately, there is no single way to prepare your data to train a Sentence Transformers model. It largely depends on your goals and the structure of your data. If you don't have an explicit label, which is the most likely scenario, you can derive it from the design of the documents where you obtained the sentences. For example, two sentences in the same report should be more comparable than two sentences in different reports. Neighboring sentences can be more comparable than non-neighboring sentences.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Unfortunately, there is no single way to prepare your data to train a Sentence Transformers model. It largely depends on your goals and the structure of your data. If you don't have an explicit label, which is the most likely scenario, you can derive it from the design of the documents where you obtained the sentences. For example, two sentences in the same report should be more comparable than two sentences in different reports. Neighboring sentences might be more comparable than non-neighboring sentences.
```

> Furthermore, the structure of our data will affect the loss function we can use. In the next section, we will review this part.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Furthermore, the structure of your data will influence which loss function you can use. This will be discussed in the next section
```

Most dataset configurations will take one of four forms:

> - Case 1: The example is a pair of sentences and a label indicating how similar they are. The label can be either an integer (0 or 1) or a float. This case applies to datasets originally prepared for Natural Language Inference (NLI), since they contain pairs of sentences with a label indicating whether they infer each other or not.

Reviewer 2: Maybe showing a dataset (e.g. a single sample of a dataset) could be useful for each of these

Author: I think this is indeed really valuable. I did a couple of lines below. 🚀

> - Case 2: The example is a pair of positive (similar) sentences **without** a label. For example, pairs of paraphrases, pairs of duplicate questions, pairs of (query, response), or pairs of (source_language, target_language). Natural Language Inference datasets can be formatted this way. Having your data in this format can be great since we can use the `MultipleNegativesRankingLoss`, one of the most used loss functions for Sentence Transformers models. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Case 2: The example is a pair of positive (similar) sentences **without** a label. For example, pairs of paraphrases, pairs of duplicate questions, pairs of (query, response), or pairs of (source_language, target_language). NLI datasets can also be formatted this way. Having your data in this format can be great since you can use the `MultipleNegativesRankingLoss`, one of the most used loss functions for Sentence Transformers models. 
```

> - Case 2: The example is a pair of positive (similar) sentences **without** a label. For example, pairs of paraphrases, pairs of duplicate questions, pairs of (query, response), or pairs of (source_language, target_language). Natural Language Inference datasets can be formatted this way. Having your data in this format can be great since we can use the `MultipleNegativesRankingLoss`, one of the most used loss functions for Sentence Transformers models. 

Reviewer 2: Maybe mention that an example here could be for paraphrasing or summarization

Author: Added it as examples of data that can be inputed: `Case 2: The example is a pair of positive (similar) sentences **without** a label. For example, pairs of paraphrases, pairs of full texts and their summaries, ...`

- Case 3: The example is a sentence with an integer label. This data format is easily converted by loss functions into three sentences (triplets) where the first is an "anchor", the second a "positive" of the same class as the anchor, and the third a "negative" of a different class. Each sentence has an integer label indicating the class to which it belongs.
- Case 4: Similar to the third case, the example is a triplet (anchor, positive, negative); however, **there is no class** (nor label) for the sentences.

> Note that Sentence Transformers models can be trained with human labeling (cases 1 and 3) or with labels automatically deduced from text formatting (mainly case 2; although case 4 does not require labels, it is more difficult to find data in a triplet IRL unless you process it as the [`MegaBatchMarginLoss`](https://www.sbert.net/docs/package_reference/losses.html#megabatchmarginloss) function does).

Reviewer 2: I would not write IRL here

> There are datasets on the Hugging Face Hub for each of the above cases. Additionally, the datasets in the Hub have a Dataset Preview functionality that allows you to view the structure of datasets before downloading them. Here are sample data sets for each of these cases:

Reviewer 2: Nice to showcase this :fire:

- Case 1: The same setup as for NLI can be used. Review the structure of the [SNLI dataset](https://huggingface.co/datasets/snli). The [Yahoo Answers Topics dataset](https://huggingface.co/datasets/yahoo_answers_topics) has integer labels each pair of sentences.

- Case 2: The [Sentence Compression dataset](https://huggingface.co/datasets/embedding-data/sentence-compression) has examples made up of positive pairs.

- Case 3: The [TREC dataset](https://huggingface.co/datasets/trec) or [Yahoo Answers Topics dataset](https://huggingface.co/datasets/yahoo_answers_topics) have integer labels for each sentence.

- Case 4: The [Quora Triplets dataset](https://huggingface.co/datasets/embedding-data/QQP_triplets).

> The next step is converting the dataset into a format our Sentence Transformers model can understand. The model cannot accept raw lists of strings. Each example must be converted to a `sentence_transformers.InputExample` class and then to a `torch.utils.data.DataLoader` class to batch and shuffle the examples.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The next step is converting the dataset into a format the Sentence Transformers model can understand. The model cannot accept raw lists of strings. Each example must be converted to a `sentence_transformers.InputExample` class and then to a `torch.utils.data.DataLoader` class to batch and shuffle the examples.
```

Install Hugging Face Datasets with `pip install datasets`. Then import a dataset with the `load_dataset` function:

```py
from datasets import load_dataset

dataset_id = "embedding-data/QQP_triplets"
dataset = load_dataset(dataset_id)
```

> In this case, we are using an unlabeled triplets dataset, the fourth case above.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This guide uses an unlabeled triplets dataset, the fourth case above.
```

> We can index and explore the Hugging Face datasets easily (see the [Documentation](https://huggingface.co/docs/datasets/index)):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With the `datasets` library you can explore the dataset:
```

```py
print(f"- The {dataset_id} dataset has {dataset['train'].num_rows} examples.")
print(f"- Each example is a {type(dataset['train'][0])} with a {type(dataset['train'][0]['set'])} as value.")
print(f"- Examples look like this: {dataset['train'][0]}")
```
Output:

```py
- The embedding-data/QQP_triplets dataset has 101762 examples.
- Each example is a <class 'dict'> with a <class 'dict'> as value.
- Examples look like this: {'set': {'query': 'Why in India do we not have one on one political debate as in USA?', 'pos': ['Why can't we have a public debate between politicians in India like the one in US?'], 'neg': ['Can people on Quora stop India Pakistan debate? We are sick and tired seeing this everyday in bulk?'...]
```

> Convert the examples into `InputExample`'s. For simplicity, (1) only one of the negatives in the [embedding-data/QQP_triplets]((https://huggingface.co/datasets/embedding-data/QQP_triplets)) dataset, and (2) only 100 examples will be used. We use `tqdm` to get a progress bar.

Reviewer 2: For me it was not very clear that `pos` is a list of one sentence while `neg` is a list of multiple sentences, so maybe that's worth clarifying.

Author: Agree, I added a better text:

ou can see that `query` (the anchor) has a single sentence, `pos` (positive) is a list of sentences (the one we print has only one sentence), and `neg` (negative) has a list of multiple sentences.

Convert the examples into `InputExample`'s. For simplicity, (1) only one of the positives and one of the negatives in the [embedding-data/QQP_triplets]((https://huggingface.co/datasets/embedding-data/QQP_triplets)) dataset will be used. (2) We will only employ 1,000 examples. You can obtain much better results by increasing the number of examples.

> Convert the examples into `InputExample`'s. For simplicity, (1) only one of the negatives in the [embedding-data/QQP_triplets]((https://huggingface.co/datasets/embedding-data/QQP_triplets)) dataset, and (2) only 100 examples will be used. We use `tqdm` to get a progress bar.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Convert the examples into `InputExample`'s. For simplicity, (1) only one of the negatives in the [embedding-data/QQP_triplets]((https://huggingface.co/datasets/embedding-data/QQP_triplets)) dataset, and (2) only 100 examples will be used. 
```

```py
from tqdm.auto import tqdm

train_examples = []
n_examples = 100 
## For training with the entire dataset you can use `for i in range(dataset['train'].num_rows):`

for i in tqdm(range(n_examples)):
  example = dataset['train']['set'][i]
  train_examples.append(InputExample(texts=[example['query'], example['pos'], example['neg'][0]], label=0))
```
Convert the training examples to a `Dataloader`.

```py
from torch.utils.data import DataLoader

train_dataloader = DataLoader(train_examples, shuffle=True, batch_size=16)
```

> The next step is to choose a suitable loss function that can be used with the current format of our data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The next step is to choose a suitable loss function that can be used with the data format.
```

## Loss functions for training a Sentence Transformers model

> Remember the four different cases your data could be in? Each will have a different loss function associated with it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Remember the four different formats your data could be in? Each will have a different loss function associated with it.
```

Case 1: Pair of sentences and a label indicating how similar they are. The loss function optimizes such that (1) the sentences with the closest labels are near in the vector space, and (2) the sentences with the farthest labels are as far as possible. The loss function depends on the format of the label. If its an integer use [`ContrastiveLoss`](https://www.sbert.net/docs/package_reference/losses.html#contrastiveloss) or [`SoftmaxLoss`](https://www.sbert.net/docs/package_reference/losses.html#softmaxloss); if its a float you can use [`CosineSimilarityLoss`](https://www.sbert.net/docs/package_reference/losses.html#cosinesimilarityloss). 

> Case 2: If we only had two similar sentences (two positives) with no labels, then we can use the [`MultipleNegativesRankingLoss`](https://www.sbert.net/docs/package_reference/losses.html#multiplenegativesrankingloss) function. The [`MegaBatchMarginLoss`](https://www.sbert.net/docs/package_reference/losses.html#megabatchmarginloss) can also be used, and it would convert your examples to triplets `(anchor_i, positive_i, positive_j)` where `positive_j` serves as the negative.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Case 2: If you only have two similar sentences (two positives) with no labels, then you can use the [`MultipleNegativesRankingLoss`](https://www.sbert.net/docs/package_reference/losses.html#multiplenegativesrankingloss) function. The [`MegaBatchMarginLoss`](https://www.sbert.net/docs/package_reference/losses.html#megabatchmarginloss) can also be used, and it would convert your examples to triplets `(anchor_i, positive_i, positive_j)` where `positive_j` serves as the negative.
```

> Case 3: When our example is a triplet of the form `[anchor, positive, negative]` and we have an integer label for each, a loss function optimizes the model so that the anchor and positive sentences are closer together in vector space than the anchor and negative sentences. We can use [`BatchHardTripletLoss`](https://www.sbert.net/docs/package_reference/losses.html#batchhardtripletloss), which requires the data to be labeled with integers (e.g., labels 1, 2, 3) assuming that samples with the same label are similar. Therefore, anchors and positives must have the same label, while negatives must have a different one. Alternatively, you can use [`BatchAllTripletLoss`](https://www.sbert.net/docs/package_reference/losses.html#batchalltripletloss), [`BatchHardSoftMarginTripletLoss`](https://www.sbert.net/docs/package_reference/loss.html#batchhardsoftmargintripletloss), or [`BatchSemiHardTripletLoss`](https://www.sbert.net/docs/package_reference/losses.html#batchsemihardtripletloss). The differences between them is beyond the scope of this tutorial, but can be reviewed in the Sentence Transformers documentation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Case 3: When your samples are triplets of the form `[anchor, positive, negative]` and you have an integer label for each, a loss function optimizes the model so that the anchor and positive sentences are closer together in vector space than the anchor and negative sentences. You can use [`BatchHardTripletLoss`](https://www.sbert.net/docs/package_reference/losses.html#batchhardtripletloss), which requires the data to be labeled with integers (e.g., labels 1, 2, 3) assuming that samples with the same label are similar. Therefore, anchors and positives must have the same label, while negatives must have a different one. Alternatively, you can use [`BatchAllTripletLoss`](https://www.sbert.net/docs/package_reference/losses.html#batchalltripletloss), [`BatchHardSoftMarginTripletLoss`](https://www.sbert.net/docs/package_reference/loss.html#batchhardsoftmargintripletloss), or [`BatchSemiHardTripletLoss`](https://www.sbert.net/docs/package_reference/losses.html#batchsemihardtripletloss). The differences between them is beyond the scope of this tutorial, but can be reviewed in the Sentence Transformers documentation.
```

> Case 4: If we don't have a label for each sentence in the triplets, we should use [`TripletLoss`](https://www.sbert.net/docs/package_reference/losses.html#tripletloss). This loss minimizes the distance between the anchor and the positive sentences while maximizing the distance between the anchor and the negative sentences.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Case 4: If you don't have a label for each sentence in the triplets, you should use [`TripletLoss`](https://www.sbert.net/docs/package_reference/losses.html#tripletloss). This loss minimizes the distance between the anchor and the positive sentences while maximizing the distance between the anchor and the negative sentences.
```

> 

Reviewer 2: This was a lot of very useful information! Maybe having a small table to summarize all of this would be useful, with the case, the loss function, and a sample

Author: Agree! Great idea! I added a table.

The hardest part is choosing a suitable loss function conceptually. In the code, there are only two lines:

```py
from sentence_transformers import losses

train_loss = losses.TripletLoss(model=model)
```
Once the dataset is in the desired format and a suitable loss function is in place, fitting and training a Sentence Transformers is simple.

## How to fine-tune a Sentence Transformer model

> "SentenceTransformers was designed so that fine-tuning your own sentence/text embeddings models is easy. It provides most of the building blocks you can stick together to tune embeddings for your specific task." - [Sentence Transformers Documentation](https://www.sbert.net/docs/training/overview.html#training-overview).

> For simplicity, we are not adding an Evaluator that works on a development or test subset of the data. However, if we did, it would look like this: `evaluator = TripletEvaluator.from_input_examples(dev_examples, name='dev')`.

Reviewer 2: I don't think people know what an `Evaluator` is at this point, so I think you can remove this to keep it simple

This is what the training or fine-tuning looks like:

```py
model.fit(train_objectives=[(train_dataloader, train_loss)], epochs=1) 
```

Remember that if you are fine-tuning an existing Sentence Transformers model, you can directly call the `fit` method from it. If this is a new Sentence Transformers model, you must first define it as we did in the "How Sentence Transformers models work" section.

> That's it; we have a new or improved Sentence Transformers model!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
That's it; you have a new or improved Sentence Transformers model!
```

> 

Reviewer 2: I think this is an amazing opportunity to show how to push models to the Hub. I would do that after training as then you get the nice widget and model card and others will upload their models.

## What are the limits of Sentence Transformers?

> Sentence Transformers models work much better than the simple Transformers models for semantic search. However, where do the Sentence Transformers models not work well? If your task is classification, then using sentence embeddings is the wrong approach. In that case, [Cross Encoders](https://www.sbert.net/examples/training/cross-encoder/README.html) work much better. Fortunately, you can find these models in the same Sentence Transformers library. 

Reviewer 2: Maybe clarify that this is when talking about passing multiple sentences for classification. FOr usual classification, transformers work well and is the to-go library. I think this might confuse readers though, so I would likely just point out to `transformers` for classification.

Author: Agree! Thanks.
